Young or old,
we need to consider the topic
of thinking ability
and how to develop it effectively.
All of us can think.
We can think about a lot of things
—some good and some bad.
It’s not uncommon, even for an adult,
to let his mind wander aimlessly.
Or a person may spend time thinking
of frivolous matters of little substance.
That’s what can happen to our thinking,
but it doesn’t always have a positive effect
on our life or our future.
Though specifically addressed to a young man,
the Bible book of Proverbs
gives sound advice for all of us.
Proverbs 1:4 says:
“To give a young man
[for that matter any of us]
knowledge and thinking ability.”
What is thinking ability in this verse?
The Hebrew word translated “thinking ability”
can be used in a bad sense
or in a favorable one.
So our mind and thoughts can be directed
to a worthy, upright end
or just the opposite.
If we incline our thinking to aspects
of Jehovah’s will and purposes,
we’ll safeguard our own thinking ability,
directing it into the right channels.
How valuable
is that type of thinking process?
Turn to Proverbs 3:21, 22,
which states: “Safeguard practical wisdom
“and thinking ability;
they will give you life.”
Thinking ability
is not in the exclusive realm
of the studious type.
Throughout our entire life,
we take in information by reading,
seeing, hearing,
and experiencing things.
And it’s the way we take in information
and react to it
that shapes our individual behavior
and personality.
Many persons
have not used their minds for much more
than the essentials of daily living.
But to succeed in life and in Jehovah’s eyes,
it’s necessary that we learn to train,
develop, and guard thinking ability.
Consider how trained thinking ability
might protect us
when it comes to using the Internet wisely.
While the Internet can be an excellent tool
for gathering knowledge,
thinking ability when properly exercised
will safeguard us from its harmful effects.
For example, some popular social media sites
contain short videos
designed to deliver instant gratification.
If the viewer
gets no immediate emotional reward,
he is tempted to keep scrolling
to find material
that will give the desired effect.
Over time,
this can lower one’s attention span,
which may impede a person’s ability to learn,
retain, and recall information.
None of us would want that to happen to us,
would we?
Additionally, studies have shown
that those who spend too much
of their time
with their electronic devices
are more prone to stress, anxiety,
depression, or other mental health problems.
On the other hand, thinking ability
can help us to work out ways
to control our use of such technology.
For example, God-oriented thinking ability
can help us to distinguish truth
from misleading and false information.
Thus, there is wisdom in what is stated
at Proverbs 2:11, 12:
“Thinking ability
“will keep watch over you,
“and discernment will safeguard you,
to save you from the bad course.”
Why is this so important?
Well, thinking ability and discernment
gives us perception.
And perception is closely related
to our conscience.
What we have meditated on
from God’s Word and stored in our mind
can mold our conscience,
which is an inner mechanism
to warn us of wrong actions or tendencies.
In effect, our thinking watches over us.
Notice how this is alluded to
at Hebrews 5:14:
“But solid food belongs to mature people,
“to those who through use
have their powers of discernment
“[that is, their thinking]
trained to distinguish
both right and wrong.”
All of us, both young and old,
should think carefully
about the following suggestions:
First, grow in knowledge of Jehovah.
Proverbs 9:10 says in part:
“Knowledge of the Most Holy One
is understanding.”
Coming to know Jehovah
is a blessing and a protection.
We need to pray to Jehovah
for insight when we study,
apply ourselves to Bible reading
on a regular basis,
and immerse ourselves in the truth.
We should talk to Jehovah
in prayer as our closest confidant.
This means using our thinking ability
to convince ourselves that Jehovah’s advice
is the best advice,
because doing so will
safeguard us when we’re tempted,
tested, or put into a situation
where we know we must say
no.
Remember who we are, what we stand for,
and to whom we have dedicated our life.
Next suggestion:
We need to continue to enhance
our Christian personality.
This is important, but why?
Because people who love Jehovah
will like and respect us for who we are.
And what kind of personality
are we suggesting?
Did you note the expression
“Christian personality”?
That means “Christlike.”
We cannot go wrong
by imitating Jesus in any way possible.
Recall that 1 Peter 2:21 says:
“To this course you were called,
“because even Christ suffered for you,
leaving a model
for you to follow his steps closely.”
Jesus’ whole way of life
—his attitudes, his values,
his interactions with others—
culminated into a personality
that we should strive to follow closely.
We know well how we want to look
when dressed for a special occasion.
We clothe ourselves
with careful attention to details.
Colossians 3:10
picks up on the illustration of clothing.
There it states:
“And clothe yourselves
with the new personality.”
Similarly, Romans 13:14
tells us: “Put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and do not be planning ahead
for the desires of the flesh.”
We have to think
about Jesus’ personality constantly.
It certainly does not come naturally to us
imperfect descendants of Adam.
It takes real thinking ability.
And remember, in this case,
we are not clothing ourselves
just for one special occasion.
This is to be our daily wardrobe.
To the extent possible,
with our imperfection,
we continuously work to reflect
Jesus’ personality.
Next suggestion:
Give priority to our priorities.
What does this mean?
To accomplish things in life,
we must have schedules,
routines, and priorities.
For instance, at Bethel,
much work is accomplished
because of the daily routine
and because of giving priority
to spiritual matters.
At Philippians 1:10, Paul said
to “make sure of the more important things.”
Wholesome thinking ability
will help us to see the value
of organizing our life each day
to give priority
to the most important things.
Next suggestion:
Keep a modest view
of our own knowledge and experience.
Thinking ability will help us to filter
the information we let into our mind.
The real test of whether our thinking ability
has been properly trained
is how we apply knowledge.
So we need to be
cautious in life,
ask questions,
fact-check,
get advice, read, study,
and learn from Bible principles.
And once we’ve accumulated knowledge,
insight, and thinking ability,
modesty is involved in how we share it.
The apostle Paul said at Romans 12:3:
“I tell everyone there among you
“not to think more of himself
than it is necessary to think,
but to think so as to have a sound mind.”
Yes, we need to display a modest outlook
on our acquired thinking ability.
Did you notice it said
to think with “a sound mind,”
not an inflated mind,
not thinking more of ourselves
than is necessary to think?
Another way to use thinking ability
in this old world
is to avoid debt.
Now, why is this our last point?
Because material things
are not the most important things in life.
Many work themselves to death
to gain material prosperity.
However, as Christians,
there’s other work that’s related to worship.
We want to work ourselves to life,
yes, focused on everlasting life yet ahead.
It’s true, though, that some money is needed
to buy the necessities of life.
Whether we’re young
and just starting to earn a living
or we’re older
and have been working secularly for years,
we need to learn to manage and budget money.
This involves using our thinking ability
to separate needs from wants
and being cautious
about accumulating much debt.
Remember, according to Proverbs 22:7,
“the borrower is a slave to the lender.”
These few suggestions
are but a sample of areas in life
where we need
thinking ability and discernment
in order to analyze our situation,
make decisions, and determine future plans.
Always remember the advice
at Proverbs 3:21, 22:
“Safeguard practical wisdom
“and thinking ability;
they will give you life.”
Yes and—we may add—
even everlasting life
in God’s righteous new world!